I might have a good friend that I want to promote it,
but his record is not as good as the others. How in
the hell can you promote him and have him embarrass
you later because everybody's going to know who in
the hell is on the board. But if I've got a fellow
that I know and he's got a good record and it's equal
to all the others and I know him, You remember, I'm a
human being. That's a guy that I'm probably going
to select for promotion. But I don't want to get in
that sort of process. I support the whole system. I
think it makes mistakes, but again, you're
dealing with people,
and I support it. Well, let me ask you a question
about your record. According to your record, you
were promoted to Brigadier General 1 December
1965, and then underneath that it says Major
General 1 July 65, which is earlier, and then under
that it says promoted 1 October 69. What is the
situation there? Let me see if I can explain that.
You've got an Army, Navy, and Air Force.
It ought to have a balance in the ranks, promotion
this year. Admirals this year in the Navy, rear
admirals, two-star rear admirals this year, the
two-star Air Force, and two-star Army all ought to
rank from this year according to when they're
promoted. Okay? In other words, you and I were on
this year's list announced in December for
promotion next fiscal year. Okay?
You were number one on the list, I was number two.
Navy's got the same thing, number one and number
two, and Air Force number one and number two.
General comparative ranks should be the same
amongst the three of us, Army, Navy, and Air Force.
Yes, but this deals with the Navy, doesn't it?
Yeah, this deals with the Navy of one grade. You see
what I mean? They go from zero to two stars. So to
balance that, that's what you do. You backdate to a
data rank. You see my data rank? Okay, well that
explains it. Okay, now in this position this
dual-purpose job which you had for three years,
from August 62 to October 65, in
this job, was it considered like a tour of duty, or
would you have stayed there longer at the request
of the Secretary of Defense? Well, they try to
respect.
is considered
for a colonel and staff position a three-year tour
is considered a
complete tour duty.
I think mine was a little longer than that. But
that's at the request of the secretary. You've
described McNamara, now that I've heard some
words about his so-called whiz kids that he
brought into the Department of Defense, one of the
attempts, of course, to make it more cost
efficient, to streamline it. Did you meet any of
these people? Who were they? What did you think of
them? I'm trying to think of one of their
I can't think of his name now. Well, let's put it
this way. I got along with him and worked with him,
but I thought they were an egotistical
anti-military
bloc, generally speaking. And you didn't think
that of McNamara? Uh, no. I thought he was just
anti-people.
And I accepted the fact that- You mean he was
unsociable? No, he just didn't think too much of
people. He thought people are just a bunch of, you
know, they had no personal feelings or anything.
What I guess that I'm trying to say, he thought you
could computerize people and just push a button
and they'd all fall out, you know, and line up and so
on and forth. In no way in God's world you'll ever
manage people. You lead people, but you'll never
manage them in the same sense as you manage blocks
of wood, or tanks, or airplanes, and so on and
forth, and manage the finance and the other
aspects of life. You just can't computerize the
individualities of each guy. and get a handle on
management of all that. That's what he, that was
his major, that and the political, total
disregard for the political side of democracy.
But you didn't care for the so-called whiz kids?
Oh, I got along with them. I don't think they made a
contribution.
I can tell you that they probably contributed to
the political loss, as you may call it, of the
Vietnam conflict.
I know of nothing that they did that made a
contribution during that period of time.
They were the ones that was involved in having the
war end with not one tank, not one airplane, not one
round of ammunition left. Okay. Let's talk about
some of the interesting episodes during that
Kennedy period. One of course is Cuba. Yeah. Tell
me about your dealings. Cuba was a sort of thing
that
my boss and I slept in the Pentagon during the
intense days of that. We were responsible for the
reserve call-up,
which was against my better judgment, but I was
overruled because of the inadequacies that they,
particularly the Army, were coming up with in
order to go to fight the war in Cuba. Why were you
against calling up the reserves? I felt like that
we ought to go do it with what we had in hand, and
I felt that
we were over exaggerating what we needed. For
example, why do you need to call up 300 or 400
reserve colonels to come in and supplement a staff
that's already 25% overstrength in the
Department of the Army? Tell me why you want to do
that. Call them mobilization designees? Why do
you want to do that? Why did they? They didn't. I
denied that. But they wanted it. Why do you want to
call up a truck company
and you have no trucks and it has one truck? What are
you getting out of that?
Why do you call up the worst truck company you've
got instead of calling up the best if you really
need one? Because of bad management and you don't
know what the hell you've got. And it exposed to the
world the inadequacies of our army particularly
in its management and knowing the readiness and
what it has in the reserves.
It was so bad and so embarrassing to us as a nation
that I refused completely and did not get
overruled on calling up the reserves for Vietnam
until after I had left there. somebody come in and
call them up. And, of course, the units that they
called up never got themselves in shape to go. And
they called up very few. Yeah, very few.
Now,
they called up Signal Company.
They called up amphibious truck companies and all
this sort of stuff with no trucks and people. And
what did they do? And no equipment to give them.
It's a total disaster. And that's the reason why I
didn't want this done. I knew the status of our
reserves.
And so why do you want to do that? Well, it was the
most embarrassing episode of our time
in this decade, I believe, from the standpoint of
the military. Next to Mr. Carter's Iranian
disaster, where he's gonna go evacuate the
hostages now were you then were you as far as the
manpower is concerned were you in charge or was one
of your functions to help assemble that very large
invasion force down in Florida only the reserve
aspect the other part that we are deeply involved
in is seeking manpower requirements totally and
control of manpower cornerments and what do you
bring out of the what do you call up and web
individuals do you allow the cuban conflict to
pull all the school teachers and the lawyers and
the doctors out of one village or out of that one
part of the country and so on and forth to support
that conflict down there or do you go ahead and try
to do it without being disruptive to the whole of
our society or where do you declare a national
emergency and and call up everybody and put a
package of legislation national emergency
legislation that high and I had a lot of it that
government controls goes on pricing and housing
transportation air gasoline food services the
whole thousand things would be totally
disruptive for the whole of our society because
you got a little old conflict down here that you
ought to clean up in about ten days?
The answer is no, but you've got to justify that by a
lot of facts and data which you spend a lot of hours
putting together to support your position.
Was your opinion in a Cuban Missile Crisis that it
would be a During those days, during those very
tense days, you said that you were sleeping at the
Pentagon. Yes, sleeping in my office, yes. Tell me
about the feelings there, the tension. How were
the people? How were they behaving? Did they feel
war was winning?
A lot of us knew what hour we were going to go.
What do you mean? Oh, we were within hours of
blowing the whistle.
Went at 10 o'clock one Sunday morning.
The president got a call over the hotline from
Khrushchev and said, I'll move them out. And
goddamn, we were worried about the Pentagon.
phones down
at JCS in the operations room.
My boss buzzed me on the phone. He said, don't you
think we ought to go home? It's Sunday. I said,
well, I'm ready. Let's go. Who was your boss? Norm
Paul. Oh, yeah. So, we left,
went home. And then there was a collective sigh of
relief? I guess everybody gets worked up to these
things. You get ready to go, so what the hell
difference it make, you know?
You know that? Did you feel that America was
prepared? Well, we were about to sink Georgia and
Florida.
Yeah, I said, God damn, we move one more truck down
there, that damn place, those places are gonna
sink.
Unloaded Fort Hood.
Damn, I said, I told Norm Paul one morning, I said,
he said, we still have Florida underwater? I said,
no sir, not yet, but I said, boy, it's getting
pretty damn high.
Did you have the plans made out for the invasion? Oh
hell, yeah. You have contingency plans all the
time. Oh yeah, oh yeah. Hell, we were ready to go.
We were ready to go.
Did you have any dealings whatsoever with the Bay
of Pigs? No, no.
and other organizations.
What about the early years of Vietnam when we were
just starting to put in our advisors, getting them
up to about 16,000 by the time of death? I was
responsible for coming up to President Johnson
with a manpower plan for support conflict in
Vietnam. Oh, you were? Yeah. Mr. McNamara called
Mr. Paul at 7
o'clock one evening. I think this is about October
or November of 1963
or 64, somewhere in there.
Probably 64, a year or so after the death of
Kennedy. Yeah, 64. Bob McNamara called Norm Paul,
and I was in with Norm Paul. It was about 7 o'clock at
night.
And Bob said to Norm, he said, Hey, Norm, I've got to
have a plan, an entire plan to support conflict in
Vietnam to the president at 9 o'clock in the
morning. said, uh, put an analyst on that and give
me a plan for my signature as president by nine in
the morning. Norm said, uh, well the analyst is
sitting right here with me. And McNamara said,
okay, go ahead and get that done for me. I'll see it
in the morning. So I'd let my secretary back there,
Virginia McGuire, and I'd send all my other
officers, all colonels and captains from the Navy
and the Air Force and Army. You'd send them home?
Oh, they'd all go home. I'd let them all go home.
Back there, Virginia McGuire, who was a favorite
of Ms. Hollingsworth and one of the secretaries
that I've had, She was locking up the safes, and I
said, get your book.
She said, what's
all about? I said, well, I said, we just got a
requirement here we got to put together. She said,
I haven't been home before 9 o'clock in two weeks,
and I don't even get a chance to wash my clothes. I
said, well, you can take care of that some other
time. I said, right now, get that safe open and get
your book here. I want to dictate to you the plan
that's got to meet the president in the morning at 9
o'clock. We finished it at 5 o'clock in the
morning, about 18 pages. And she said... And you
did it yourself? I did it myself. How could you come
up with it? In other words, you had to... I've been
working on this stuff. and you just had it on the top
of your head. Oh, yeah, I'd already thought about
it, you know.
So,
I said, Virginia, how do you like that? She said, I
believe that's the best one you've ever dictated.
And I said, well, you know, there's only one word
that you've missed all night long. And I said, we
got about 18 or 20 pages. I said, why don't you just
go ahead and
prepare. I had the last page prepared for my
initials, J-F-H. And I had to lead Page into, for
Secretary of Defense, through Assistant
Secretary of Defense, manpower, subject,
manpower support for Vietnam conflict,
underlined, date, and so
on. I said, I'll tell you what to do. Go in there and
change to get Mr. McNamara stationary now
and put Memorandum for the President of the United
States subject and
re-type the last page and put Robert M. McNamara.
She said, you really feel confident about that?
Then when I get through, give me ten copies
so we can finish this thing off. Had the safes
locked up. I got in my car and went home. I guess it
was five o'clock. I shaved five o'clock in the
morning. I shaved.
Woke Miss Hollingsworth up at 6.30 and said,
I'll try to get home earlier today, but I don't know
what time. I went back. I belong to the Secretary of
Defense at Miss. I get back at 7 o'clock and here's
my boss, Norman Paul. Here's Dr. Foster, a
director of research and engineering. Here's Mr.
Cyrus Vance, who is a deputy secretary of defense,
former secretary of the army. now former
Secretary of State
and here is Mr. Charlie Hitch who is a comptroller
of the Defense Department
and Mr. Tom Moore who is Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Installations and Logistics
and
seemed like There might have been one more
assistant secretary there. We were having
breakfast and discussing usual subjects of
common interest when Mr. Paul said, you know,
Holly, we've got to get out of here and it must be 730
now and get this paper ready for Bob on that
manpower support plan. I said, oh, I finished that
at 5 o'clock this morning. He said, you must be
kidding. I said, no. He said, well, where is it? I
said, it's in this little package I got down here.
He said, let me see it. I said, I got a copy for
everybody here. He started reading it. Deputy
Secretary of Defense started reading it. I said,
hell, nothing wrong with this Mr. Charlie Hitch
the comptroller who has to pay for all this said
well let's take this paper and go see Bob right now
they took my damn paper stamp top secret should be
signed out you know by everybody back and forth
everybody touching a long list of names whoever
read it took my paper Top secret. I've never seen
the paper again. They delivered by McNamara to
President Johnson. He kept the paper. That came
the support plan that Mr. Johnson, the president,
dictated back to the Defense Department to
support, manpower support for Vietnam, JCS,
Army, Navy, Air Force. Nobody had chopped on it.
That's fantastic. Yeah, that's the way things
happen.
So it's basically your plan then for Johnson's
call up? It was his plan. How he was going to support
the manpower requirements for Vietnam.
That's incredible.
but that's some experiences you get involved in at
the cabinet level and this is what makes this is
what makes all
the hard work and sacrifice that you may go through
a time worthwhile you know to make a contribution
you see to have a part in what the hell's happening
in the management of our whole country and running
of our whole country
That to me is worth spending a lot of hard days of
study and hard work and everything else for. To get
yourself in a position where you make a
contribution to do something. Now at this time of
course one of Matt and Amara's desires was to
so-called streamline the military and to get rid
of some of the overlap that we had in each service.
For example, some of the supply in the supply area
and the defense intelligence agency trying to set
up one agency instead of having every service have
their own agency. Well, you know... How was your
feeling toward the streamline? Well, it's a
matter of why should the Army be buying 30 caliber
ammunition and the Air Force 30 caliber
ammunition and the Navy 30 caliber ammunition
those are three procurement agencies and all
three doing different all three different
accountabilities systems and why don't you
consolidate that and see if you can't get it all
together cheaper more cost effective and get
better control of what the hell the requirements
are, and better management. And I agree with that.
I can't see why the Air Force has to have Granadas,
and the Navy has to have Valiants, and the Army has
to have Chevrolets. And they may all pay a
different price. They have to stock all different
kinds of spare parts. Why don't you put that all
together and let a procurement agency provide
them with that capability, maybe get it cheaper
and cut down on carrying three different kinds of
spare parts. Now this did raise some anger in
military circles because some of the Well,
because of inter-service rivalry and because of
some of the people who were moved or shifted
around. Like setting up the Defense Intelligence
Agency, General Maples was in on that, and he said
there were a number of people that were really
irritated that each service was losing some of its
intelligence capabilities for one centralized
organization. Did you... Would you, I mean, did
you hear a lot of grumbling? Oh, I think, well, I
think every time you change something, whether
it's change for the better or change for the worse,
there's nothing that, nothing in life amongst
people that hurts worse than change.
That, that really... that's really one of the
worst things that can happen to people is change
because some like it and some dislike it and when
you get change in policies you get change in
organizations people are going to they're split
right down the middle on these things generally
speaking and in the case of the intelligence group
it's kind of pull together, if you're the
Secretary of Defense,
you get one set of reports out of the Navy, another
one from the Air Force, and another one from the
Army, and maybe they're all three in this one
particular instance reporting on the same thing,
and you're getting three different reports. So,
what do you say? You say, well, who in the hell am I
supposed to believe in this damn thing? Well, why
don't we have somebody take what all three of them
are reporting and don't let me have to go dig into
each one of them to reconcile the differences.
Isn't there somebody else that can do that? And I
think this is what it's all about. And we ended up
with a lot of directorships, Defense Nuclear
Agency, he became the key guy for all nuclear
aspects of the Department of Defense. Defense
Supply, DSA, Director of Security Assistance
Agency, he's responsible for all military sales.
DIA, Director of Intelligence Agency.
National Security Agency was already in
existence, and it is a national level. CIA is a
national level. NASA, a national level
organization. But they did put in those director
areas, and I think that they made a hell of a good
contribution myself. Okay, now you said- Well,
they have not denied, in the case of DIA- the Army,
Navy, and Air Force from having their own
intelligence capability, which I think is very
appropriate. I have not denied that. Now, you're
on the cabinet level. Did you attend cabinet
meetings with Presidents Kennedy and Johnson?
No, Mr. McNamara would only invite someone if
there was a specific thing that he felt the
presence of the individual would enhance his
position in bringing about amongst the other
cabinet members what he wanted to get done. Same
way with him appearing before Congress. He would
take a 250 or 300 page black briefing book and he'd
go almost totally alone. And he knew everything
that was in that book and on what page it was. He had a
photostatic memory of that whole thing. And when I
would prepare something, a change that he wanted
made, or a change would occur on a particular table
or a page pertaining to manpower or reserves, I had
to take that particular page up there, and he would
look at it, the new one, And he'd look at the old one,
and he'd photograph the change I'd made, then he'd
personally take out the old page and put the new
page in his briefing book. So he had photostatted,
and you never had to worry about him coming back and
saying he didn't tell me what the difference in
this thing was. Phenomenal fella.
Yes.
No. You left that position in 1965 to go, well you
had a position for just three months there, Office
of the Deputy Chief of Staff or Personnel, and then
you went to the Office of the Chief of Staff of the
Army. Well, I was on two boards. I was on two boards.
One promotion board, Oh, I see. And one selection
board for students to go to the Army, War College,
National War College, to Britain, and Canadian
War Colleges. Those are just temporary? Yeah,
those are temporary before going to Vietnam.
Okay, so then you went to the 1st Infantry
Division. Right, I went to the 1st Infantry
Division. Let's start talking about that. Had you
volunteered for Vietnam? Oh yes, I had
volunteered for Vietnam about every six months
since I prepared that manpower paper and I knew we
were going to start to build up over there.
Continue
now with Vietnam. You said before lunch that you
had tried to get over there. You'd volunteered
about every six months. Yes. And you finally made
it. What was your feeling about going back to war?
Well, I thought that we had an important
responsibility over there, and I had no doubt
about the fact that what I had seen in Washington
there before the real buildup came that we were
going to do another piece of surgery on that
country as we had done in Korea
and stop the influx
of communists from the north and also
restore some sort of government other than
communism down in the South, as was the case in
Korea. That was a masterful act on the part of the
United States to stop communism and separate the
communists from the non-communists in North and
South Korea, and I had hoped that that would be the
The same thing would be true in the case of Vietnam.
What were your responsibilities on this first
tour? My responsibility on the first tour was
deputy commander for all military action and
maneuver on the part of the 1st Infantry Division.
I was assistant division commander for maneuver,
and maneuver means in the simplest terms for
conducting the battles. within the first
division. There's two assistant division
commanders or two deputies to the major general,
one for maneuver and the other one for supply,
maintenance, logistics, support. So, my
responsibilities for maneuver was to keep the
troops ready to fight,
keep them trained, conduct the battles, get
involved in the planning for the battle, and then
the execution of the plans when we were in battle.
And to oversee fire support, tactical air
support, coordination between the artillery and
the tactical air, and the coordination, the
movement, the airlifting of the battalions back
and forth in the assault areas. So it was a very busy
time. In addition to that, you are also involved in
seeing how well people are trained and how well
they're doing. and try to correct the mistakes and
errors that are being made oftentimes.
Some on the part of soldiers and officers who are
not as trained as well as they ought to be. So that's
primarily what my responsibility was at that
time. And I was there about 15 months. And where was
the first division? First division was in war
zone. three which encompassed Tainan Province.
It encompassed about eight or nine provinces
north and west of Saigon near the Cambodian
border.
And also touched on the Laos border, Laotian
border. Who was your general? The division
commander then was William E. Depew, D-E-P-U-A.
One hell of a great, fine fella. Yeah, who later,
who later, and we made quite a team, the two of us. We
worked very closely together and had a fine
relationship. And as a matter of fact,
during the 15 months that I was in the division, we
had one AWOL, one soldier went AWOL, that's all.
Only one? Only one in 15 months. In the whole
division? In the whole division. In the whole
division. That's the kind of respect that we had
from the soldier.
a remarkable sort of record. But we stayed busy and
when it came time to rest we left the soldier alone.
Let's talk about some of the operations that you
had during these 15 months. Well we had several,
many.
We had I think one operation in which We fought
every regiment of the 9th VC Division, which was a
key elite division. But Operation Junction City,
and that was
in War Zone C, I guess it was, instead of 3, War Zone
C. Tainan Province, Fook-Long Province,
north of Saigon in the Tainan, Quang Tri, Loc
Nguyen, An Loc area. And I think one of the most
significant battles that points out how great
America is is
on the night
of March 1967,
Troop A of the 5th U.S. Cavalry, which the 5th U.S.
Cavalry belonged to the 9th Infantry Division,
and the 9th Infantry Division were new in country.
And they were involved in opening and closing the
road between a place called Lai Kei, which was the
first division's base headquarters, and Quang
Tri, which is up north,
and a big rubber plantation. opening the road and
keeping it open so that supplies could get through
to operating troops that had air assaulted into
the areas.
And about midnight that night, a troop
of the cavalry was in a wagon train formation, 125
little guys. And they were hit at midnight with a
heavy concentration of mortar fire
and then assaulted from midnight until five
o'clock in the morning by the 273 VC regiment.
And this is on Highway 13 just north of Ly-K.
This 273 Regiment had a strength of about 1,900
people and they attacked 125. The
message got to me about five minutes later in my
headquarters at Ly-K, which wasn't very far from
there, This troop was being attacked.
As a matter of fact, they were assigned to the 1st
Division at that time because all of the 9th
Division hadn't gotten in.
And I immediately got airborne.
As a matter of fact, I was commanding the division
at the time because General Depew had gone away on
some other assignment on leave for two or three
weeks and I was the senior and I was commanding the
division.
I immediately got in my helicopter and went there
and started communicating with the 5th
Lieutenant Colonel who was not in the fire base
with the troop, but was some distance away in his
headquarters. And then I started communicating
with a little cavalry troop commander. It is very
important that you maintain communication with
them.